Title: Wart remover poisoning

Poisonous Ingredient
The poisonous ingredients include: Salicylates Other acids

Where Found
Ingredients in wart remover medicines that can be poisonous are found in many products, such as: Clear Away Clear Away Plantar Compound W DuoFilm DuoFilm patch DuoPlant for Feet Freezone Gordofilm Hydrisalic Keralyt Wart-Off Freeze Mediplast Mosco Occlusal Occlusal-HP Off-Ezy Wart Remover Salactic Film Trans-Ver-Sal Wart Remover Other products may also contain salicylates and other acids.

Symptoms
Below are symptoms of wart remover poisoning in different parts of the body. AIRWAYS AND LUNGS No breathing Rapid breathing Shallow breathing Fluid in the lungs EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Eye irritation Loss of vision Ringing in the ears (tinnitus) Thirst Throat burning and swelling KIDNEYS Kidney failure NERVOUS SYSTEM Agitation Collapse Convulsions (seizures) Dizziness Drowsiness Fever Hallucinations Hyperactivity SKIN Rash (usually an allergic reaction) Mild burn (from very high amounts on the skin) STOMACH AND INTESTINES Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting, possibly with blood

Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so. Flush the eyes with water and remove any medicine that remains on the skin.

Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready: The person's age, weight, and condition The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) The time it was swallowed The amount swallowed

Poison Control
Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national, toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. Your provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. If the medicine was swallowed, tests may include: Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain for neurologic symptoms Electrocardiogram (ECG) Treatment may include: Activated charcoal Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator) Fluids through a vein (IV) Laxative Medicines to treat symptoms Kidney dialysis (machine) may be needed if serious kidney damage has occurred. If the poisoning is from skin exposure, the person may receive: Washing (irrigation) of the skin, perhaps every few hours for several days Antibiotic ointment (after skin irrigation) Surgery to remove burned skin (debridement) If the poisoning is from eye exposure, the person may receive: Eye irrigation (washing) Application of eyedrops Vomiting of blood is a sign of bleeding in the stomach or intestines. A procedure called an endoscopy may be needed to stop the bleeding. In an endoscopy, a tube is placed through the mouth into the stomach and upper intestine.

Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on how much poison entered the blood and how quickly treatment was received. People can recover if the effect of the poison can be stopped. Kidney damage can be permanent.