Title: Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome

Causes
The adrenal glands are two triangle-shaped glands. One gland is located on top of each kidney. The adrenal glands produce and release different hormones that the body needs to function normally. The adrenal glands can be affected by many diseases, such as infections like WFS. WFS is caused by severe infection with meningococcus bacteria or other bacteria such as: Group B streptococcus Pseudomonas aeruginosa Streptococcus pneumoniae Staphylococcus aureus

Symptoms
Symptoms occur suddenly. They are due to the bacteria growing in large numbers inside the body. Symptoms include: Fever and chills Joint and muscle pain Headache Vomiting The infection with bacteria causes bleeding throughout the body, which causes: A rash throughout the body Disseminated intravascular coagulation in which small blood clots cut off blood supply to the organs Septic shock Bleeding into the adrenal glands makes the glands unable to produce enough adrenal hormones. This is called adrenal crisis, and it leads to symptoms such as: Dizziness, weakness Very low blood pressure Very fast heart rate Confusion or coma

Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. Blood tests will be done to confirm a bacterial infection. Tests may include: Blood culture Complete blood count with differential Blood clotting studies If your provider suspects the infection is caused by meningococcus bacteria, other tests that may be done include: Lumbar puncture to get a sample of spinal fluid for culture Skin biopsy and Gram stain Urine analysis Tests that may be ordered to help diagnose acute adrenal crisis include: ACTH (cosyntropin) stimulation test Cortisol blood test Blood sugar Potassium blood test Sodium blood test Blood pH test

Treatment
Antibiotics are started right away to treat the bacterial infection. Glucocorticoid medicines will also be given to treat adrenal gland insufficiency. Supportive treatments will be needed for other symptoms.

Outlook (Prognosis)
WFS is fatal unless treatment for the bacterial infection is started right away and glucocorticoid drugs are given.

Prevention
To prevent WFS caused by meningococcal bacteria, a vaccine is available.

Alternative Names
Fulminant meningococcemia - Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome; Fulminant meningococcal sepsis - Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome; Hemorrhagic adrenalitis

Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Adrenal Gland Disorders Meningitis Meningococcal Disease