Title: Watery eyes

Causes
Your eyes always contain tears made by the tear (lacrimal) glands just above the eyes. These tears leave the eye through a small hole in the corner of the eye called the tear duct (nasolacrimal duct). Causes of watery eyes include: Allergy to mold, dander, dust Blepharitis (swelling along the edge of the eyelid) Blockage of the tear duct Conjunctivitis Smog or chemicals in the air or wind Bright light Eyelid turning inward or outward Something in the eye (such as dust or sand) Scrape on the eye Infection Inward-growing eyelashes Irritation Increased tearing sometimes happens with: Eyestrain Laughing Vomiting Yawning One of the most common causes of excess tearing is dry eyes . Drying causes the eyes to become uncomfortable, which stimulates the body to produce too many tears. One of the main tests for diagnosing excess tearing is to check whether the eyes are too dry.

Home Care
Treatment depends on the cause of the problem. Therefore, it is important to determine the cause before treating yourself at home.

When to Contact a Medical Professional
Tearing is rarely an emergency. You should seek help right away if: Chemicals get into the eye You have severe pain, bleeding, or loss of vision You have a severe injury to the eye Also, contact your health care provider if you have: A scratch on the eye Something in the eye Painful, red eyes A lot of discharge coming from the eye Long-term, unexplained tearing Tenderness around the nose or sinuses

What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will examine your eyes and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms. Questions may include: When did the tearing start? How often does it happen? Does it affect both eyes? Do you have vision problems? Do you wear contacts or glasses? Does the tearing happen after an emotional or stressful event? Do you have eye pain or other symptoms, including headache, stuffy or runny nose, or joint or muscle aches? What medicines do you take? Do you have allergies? Did you recently hurt your eye? What seems to help stop the tearing? Your provider may order tests to help determine the cause. Treatment depends on the cause of the problem.

Alternative Names
Epiphora; Tearing - increased

Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Tears