Title: Watercolor paints - swallowing

Poisonous Ingredient
The substances in watercolor paints that can be harmful are: Man-made or natural pigments (especially cadmium and cobalt) Gum arabic Note: Watercolor paints sold for home use are generally considered nonpoisonous.

Symptoms
A person would have to eat several tubes of watercolors before symptoms occur.

Home Care
Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the person swallowed the paint, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. Do not give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. Use soap and water to wash any paint off skin and clothes.

Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed

Poison Control
Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

What to Expect at the Emergency Room
A trip to the emergency room is normally not necessary. However, if the person needs medical help, the provider will measure and monitor their vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator) Chest x-ray Electrocardiogram (ECG) Fluids through the veins (by IV) Laxatives Medicines to treat symptoms

Outlook (Prognosis)
Recovery is likely because watercolor paints are generally considered nonpoisonous. How well someone does depends on how much paint they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.

Alternative Names
Paint - watercolors