Title: Weight loss - unintentional

Causes
A loss of appetite may be due to: Feeling depressed Cancer, even when other symptoms are not present Chronic infection such as AIDS Chronic illness, such as COPD or Parkinson disease Drugs, including chemotherapy drugs, and thyroid medicines Drug use such as amphetamines and cocaine Stress or anxiety Chronic digestive system problems that decrease the amount of calories and nutrients your body absorbs, including: Celiac disease Diarrhea and other infections that last a long time, such as parasites Chronic inflammation of the pancreas Removal of part of the small intestine Overuse of laxatives Other causes such as: Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa that have not been diagnosed yet Diabetes that has not been diagnosed Overactive thyroid gland

Home Care
Your health care provider may suggest changes in your diet and an exercise program depending on the cause of your weight loss.

When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if: You or a family member loses more weight than is considered healthy for their age and height. You have lost more than 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) or 5% of your normal body weight over 6 to 12 months or less, and you do not know the reason. You have other symptoms in addition to the weight loss.

What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The provider will do a physical exam and check your weight. You will be asked questions about your medical history and symptoms, including: How much weight have you lost? When did the weight loss begin? Has the weight loss occurred quickly or slowly? Are you eating less? Are you eating different foods? Are you exercising more? Have you been sick? Do you have any dental problems or mouth sores? Do you have more stress or anxiety than usual? Have you vomited? Did you make yourself vomit? Have you been fainting ? Do you have occasional uncontrollable hunger with palpitations , tremor, or sweating ? Have you had constipation or diarrhea? Do you have increased thirst or are you drinking more? Are you urinating more than usual? Have you lost any hair? What medicines are you taking? Do you feel sad or depressed? Are you pleased or concerned with the weight loss? You may need to see a dietitian for nutrition advice.

Alternative Names
Loss of weight; Losing weight without trying; Unexplained weight loss

Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Body Weight