Title: Windshield washer fluid

Poisonous Ingredient
Methanol (methyl alcohol, wood alcohol)

Where Found
This poison is found in: Windshield washer fluid (used to clean automobile windows)

Symptoms
Symptoms of windshield washer fluid poisoning affect many different body systems. Airway and lungs: Breathing difficulty No breathing Eyes: Blindness , complete or partial, sometimes described as "snow blindness" Blurred vision Dilation (widening) of the pupils Heart and blood: Low blood pressure Nervous system: Agitated behavior Coma (unresponsiveness) Confusion Difficulty walking Dizziness Headache Seizures Skin and nails: Bluish-colored lips and fingernails (cyanosis) Stomach and intestines: Abdominal pain (severe) Diarrhea Liver problems, including jaundice (yellow skin) and bleeding Nausea Pancreatitis (nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain) Vomiting, sometimes bloody Other symptoms may include: Fatigue Leg cramps Weakness Yellow skin (jaundice)

Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional.

Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance: Person's age, weight, and condition (for example, is the person awake or alert?) Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.

Poison Control
Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive: Activated charcoal Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator) Blood and urine tests Chest x-ray CT (computerized axial tomography) scan ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV) Medicine to treat symptoms, including antidotes to reverse the effect of the poison (fomepizole or ethanol) Tube through the nose to remove the remaining poison if the person is seen within 60 minutes of swallowing it Because rapid removal of methanol is a key to treatment and survival, a kidney machine (renal dialysis) will likely be needed.

Outlook (Prognosis)
Methanol, the main ingredient in windshield washing fluid, is extremely poisonous. As little as 2 tablespoons (30 milliliters) can be deadly to a child. About 2 to 8 ounces (60 to 240 milliliters) can be deadly for an adult. Blindness is common and often permanent despite medical care. Multiple organs are affected by intake of methanol. Permanent organ damage may occur. The ultimate outcome depends on how much poison was swallowed and how soon treatment was received. Although many windshield washer fluids are a watered-down form of methanol, they can still be dangerous if swallowed.