Title: Window cleaner poisoning

Poisonous Ingredient
Older types of window cleaners may contain: Ammonia Ethanol Isopropyl alcohol Methanol New types of window cleaners are considered safer.

Where Found
Some brand names of window cleaners are: Glass Gleam Sparkle Glass Cleaner Squeegee Off Windex Other window cleaners are also available.

Symptoms
Below are symptoms of window cleaner poisoning in different parts of the body. Most of these occur from older window cleaners that contain the poisonous ingredients listed above. EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Loss of vision Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue HEART AND BLOOD Collapse Low blood pressure that develops rapidly LUNGS AND AIRWAYS Breathing difficulty (from breathing in fumes of the cleaner) Throat swelling (which may also cause breathing difficulty) NERVOUS SYSTEM Coma (decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness) Dizziness Insomnia Irritability Severe brain damage Sleepiness Stupor (decreased level of consciousness) Walking difficulties SKIN Irritation Burns Ulcers in the skin or tissues under the skin STOMACH AND INTESTINES Blood in the stool Burns in the food pipe (esophagus) Severe abdominal pain Vomiting Vomiting blood

Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the person swallowed the window cleaner, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in fumes of cleaner, move them to fresh air right away.

Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed or inhaled Amount swallowed or inhaled

Poison Control
Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive: Blood and urine tests Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator) Bronchoscopy -- camera down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs Chest x-ray ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing) Endoscopy -- camera down the throat to look for burns in the esophagus and the stomach Fluids through the vein (by IV) Medicines to treat symptoms Washing of the skin (irrigation), perhaps every few hours for several days

Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on the ingredients of the window cleaner they swallowed, how much they swallowed, and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.