Title: Wood stain poisoning

Poisonous Ingredient
Harmful substances in wood stains are hydrocarbons, or substances that contain only carbon and hydrogen. Other harmful ingredients may include: Alcohol Alkanes Cyclo alkanes Glycol ether Corrosives, such as sodium hydroxide (lye)

Where Found
Various wood stains contain these substances or other substances.

Symptoms
Below are symptoms of wood stain poisoning in different parts of the body. EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT Loss of vision Severe pain in the throat Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue STOMACH AND INTESTINES Blood in the stool Burns of the food pipe (esophagus) Diarrhea Nausea Severe abdominal pain Vomiting Vomiting blood HEART AND BLOOD Collapse Low blood pressure that develops rapidly (shock) LUNGS AND AIRWAYS Breathing difficulty (from breathing in fumes) Throat swelling (may also cause breathing difficulty) NERVOUS SYSTEM Brain damage (confusion, memory loss) Difficulty concentrating Dizziness Lightheadedness SKIN Burn Holes in the skin or tissues under the skin Irritation

Home Care
Get medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the wood stain is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes. If the person swallowed the wood stain, give them water or milk right away if poison control or a provider tells you to do so. Do not give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, seizures, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in the poison, move them to fresh air right away.

Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready: Person's age, weight, and condition Name of the product (and ingredients, if known) Time it was swallowed Amount swallowed

Poison Control
Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions. This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible. The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs , including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Tests that may be done include: Blood and urine tests Bronchoscopy -- camera down the throat to look for burns in the airways and lungs Chest x-ray Electrocardiogram (ECG) Endoscopy -- camera down the throat to look for burns in the esophagus and the stomach Treatment may include: Fluids through a vein (by IV) Medicine to treat symptoms Washing of the skin (irrigation), perhaps every few hours for several days Surgery to remove burned skin Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach ( gastric lavage ) Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a breathing machine (ventilator) Hemodialysis (kidney machine)

Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on how much wood stain was swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Swallowing such poisons can have severe effects on many parts of the body. Burns in the airway or gastrointestinal tract can lead to tissue necrosis, resulting in infection, shock and death, even several months after the substance was first swallowed. Scars may form in these tissues leading to long-term difficulties with breathing, swallowing, and digestion.